TITLE DTAI


Towards Safer Autonomous Navigation: Neurosymbolic Reinforcement Learning in LogiCity Simulator

GUIDANCE

 ●​ For more information, please contact:                        ying.jiao@kuleuven.be
                                                                 bahare.salmanibarzoki@kuleuven.be

 ●​ Promotor(s): (name)​                                         Luc de Raedt
                                                                 Giuseppe Marra

 ●​ Daily advisor                                                Ying Jiao
                                                                 Bahare Salmani


 ●​ Number of students                                           2

CONTEXT




Neurosymbolic Reinforcement Learning (RL) integrates standard deep RL with probabilistic logic shields [1].
Probabilistic logic shields define safety constraints using probabilistic logic programming to evaluate and filter unsafe
actions during the training process and yield safer policies. See an example of a probabilistic logic shield in the left
figure defined as a probabilistic program. Incorporating shields into the RL agent’s learning process allows the shielded
agent to explore and learn effectively while minimizing the risk of unsafe actions. The effectiveness of neurosymbolic
RL with probabilistic logic shields has been recently shown in the MiniHack environments [2] (more info:
https://dtai.cs.kuleuven.be/projects/nesy/minihack.html): the trained agents can reach their target destinations while
avoiding the dangerous lava cliffs.

Interestingly, the original paper [1] has won the best paper award at IJCAI 2023 and the demo paper [2] for mini-hack
has won the best demonstration award at AAAI 2025.

This thesis takes the existing MiniHack codebase as a starting point and aims to extend to an exciting urban simulator
LogiCity [3] (right figure, more info: https://jaraxxus-me.github.io/LogiCity/). LogiCity combines first-order logic (FOL)
and navigation in dynamic urban environments: the simulator provides a platform where agents (namely vehicles with
different priorities e.g., ambulances, police cars, normal cars) must reason based on both (a) standard neural policies
and (b) logical rules over logical predicates e.g., IsAmbulance(X) and IsClose(X, Y). Students will apply probabilistic logic
shields to guarantee safe behaviors in a multi-agent urban scenario.




GOAL



         Thesis proposal form
The goal of this thesis is to investigate how neuro-symbolic methods based on probabilistic logic shields can enhance
cooperation and reasoning in dynamic, logic-driven environments with multiple agents.

More specifically, the student is expected to:

    -​   Get familiar with the LogiCity simulator. Design suitable rules and urban settings for this thesis.
    -​   Extend the existing work on “probabilistic logic shields” [1] to coordinate multiple agents.
    -​   Define a multi-agent task for the LogiCity environment, e.g., extending the “safe path planning” task. Evaluate
         the performance of neurosymbolic RL with probabilistic logic shields and compare it to the fully neural RL
         methods.

The following research questions are of interest.

(i) Does incorporating probabilistic logic shields improve the metric Trajectory Success Rate (TSR)?

(ii) Does incorporating probabilistic logic shields reduce the number of training steps (the same way as it has been
shown for mini-hack)?

PROFILE/REQUIRED SKILLS (e.g. rather theoretical / rather practical implementation, required knowledge (courses,
methods, computer language(s), etc.)


The topic is suitable for students with a background in machine learning and reinforcement learning. Familiarity with
standard RL tools such as stable-baselines is encouraged. Most of the programming work will be done in python.

REFERENCES
[1] WC Yang, G Marra, G Rens, L De Raedt. Safe Reinforcement Learning via Probabilistic Logic Shields. IJCAI 2023.

[2] Debot, D., Venturato, G., Marra, G., & De Raedt, L. (2025, April). Neurosymbolic Reinforcement Learning: Playing
MiniHack With Probabilistic Logic Shields. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (Vol. 39, No.
28, pp. 29631-29633).

[3] Li, B., Li, Z., Du, Q., Luo, J., Wang, W., Xie, Y., ... & Scherer, S. (2024). LogiCity: Advancing neuro-symbolic ai with
abstract urban simulation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37, 69840-69864.




         Thesis proposal form
